=== 0.4.3 / 2012-04-13

* Rake tasks failed on Rails 3.0.x because of an issue with rgeo-activerecord pre-0.4.5. Now we require the fixed version.

=== 0.4.2 / 2012-04-12

* Support the db:structure:load rake task in recent versions of Rails.
* Support installing PostGIS via the PostgreSQL extension mechanism (requires at least PostGIS 2.0 and PostgreSQL 9.1).
* Support bounding boxes in queries (useful for "window" queries such as finding objects to display in a map region).
* Fix some issues determine the correct default value for spatial columns.

=== 0.4.1 / 2012-02-22

* Some compatibility fixes for Rails 3.2. (Reported by Ryan Williams with implementation help from Radek Paviensky.)
* Now requires rgeo-activerecord 0.4.3.

=== 0.4.0 / 2011-08-15

* Various fixes for Rails 3.1 compatibility.
* Now requires rgeo-activerecord 0.4.0.
* INCOMPATIBLE CHANGE: simple queries (e.g. MyClass.where(:latlon => my_point)) use an objective rather than spatial equality test. Earlier versions transformed this form to use st_equals, but now if you need to test for spatial equality, you'll need to call st_equals explicitly. I'm still evaluating which direction we want to go with this in the future, but we may be stuck with the current behavior because the hack required to transform these queries to use spatial equality was egregious and broke in Rails 3.1 with no clear workaround.

=== 0.3.6 / 2011-06-21

* Require latest rgeo-activerecord to get some fixes.
* Note PostgreSQL 9 requirement in the README. (Reported by Samuel Cochran)
* Now doesn't throw exceptions if an RGeo cast fails when setting an attribute.

=== 0.3.5 / 2011-04-12

* The .gemspec was missing the databases.rake file. Fixed.

=== 0.3.4 / 2011-04-11

* A .gemspec file is now available for gem building and bundler git integration.

=== 0.3.3 / 2011-02-28

* INCOMPATIBLE CHANGE: the default SRID for non-geography columns is now -1, rather than 4326. (Geography columns still default to 4326.)
* It is now possible to create a spatial column without a corresponding entry in the geometry_columns table, and the adapter now handles this case properly. (Reported by Pirmin Kalberer)
* Now requires rgeo-activerecord 0.3.1 (which brings a critical fix involving declaring multiple spatial columns in a migration).

=== 0.3.2 / 2011-02-11

* You can now specify a separate "database creation" superuser role so your normal PostgreSQL login role doesn't need superuser privileges when running database creation tasks.
* Database creation tasks automatically create all schemas listed in the schema search path.

=== 0.3.1 / 2011-02-01

* Fixed a syntax error that prevented the adapter from loading on Ruby 1.8. Whoops. (Reported by miguelperez)

=== 0.3.0 / 2011-01-26

* Reworked type and constraint handling, which should result in a large number of bug fixes, especially related to schema dumps.
* Experimental support for complex spatial queries. (Requires Arel 2.1, which is expected to be released with Rails 3.1.)
* The path to the Railtie is now different (see the README), though a compatibility wrapper has been left in the old location.
* Getting index information from the ActiveRecord class now properly recognizes spatial-ness.
* Reorganized the code a bit for better clarity.

=== 0.2.3 / 2011-01-06

* Many of ActiveRecord's rake tasks weren't working because they need to know about every adapter explicitly. I hesitate to call this "fixed" since I see it as a problem in ActiveRecord, but we now at least have a workaround so the rake tasks will run properly. (Reported by Tad Thorley.)
* Dumping schema.rb now omits the PostGIS internal tables.
* Added a new configuration parameter pointing to the script directory, for rake db:create.
* If the "postgis" schema is included in the schema search path, it is used as a container for the PostGIS internal definitions when running rake db:create. Furthermore, that schema is omitted when dumping the structure.sql. This should eliminate all the PostGIS internal cruft from SQL structure dumps, and also eliminate the errors that would appear when rebuilding a test database because the PostGIS internals would get applied twice.

=== 0.2.2 / 2010-12-27

* Support for basic spatial equality queries. e.g. constructs such as:
    MyClass.where(:geom_column => factory.point(1, 2))
    MyClass.where(:geom_column => 'POINT(1 2)')
* Fixed an exception when adding spatial columns where the column name is specified as a symbol.

=== 0.2.1 / 2010-12-15

* Provides meta-information to RGeo 0.2.2 or later to support access to PostGIS's spatial reference system table.

=== 0.2.0 / 2010-12-07

* Initial public alpha release. Spun activerecord-postgis-adapter off from the core rgeo gem.
* You can now set the factory for a specific column by name.

For earlier history, see the History file for the rgeo gem.
