== PostGIS \ActiveRecord Adapter

The PostGIS \ActiveRecord Adapter is an \ActiveRecord connection adapter
based on the standard postgresql adapter. It extends the standard adapter
to provide support for the spatial extensions provided by PostGIS, using
the {RGeo}[http://github.com/dazuma/rgeo] library to represent spatial
data in Ruby. Like the standard postgresql adapter, this adapter requires
the pg gem.

== What This Adapter Provides

=== Spatial Migrations

First, this adapter extends the migration syntax to support creating 
spatial columns and indexes. To create a spatial column, use the
<tt>:geometry</tt> type, or any of the OGC spatial types such as
<tt>:point</tt> or <tt>:line_string</tt> to set a geometry type
constraint. You may also provide any of the following options:

* <tt>:geographic</tt> -- If set to true, create a PostGIS geography
  column; otherwise create a geometry column. Default is false.
* <tt>:srid</tt> -- Set a SRID constraint for the column. Default is 4326
  for a geography column, or -1 for a geometry column. Note that PostGIS
  currently (as of version 1.5.2) requires geography columns to have SRID
  4326, so this constraint is of limited use for geography columns.
* <tt>:has_z</tt> -- Specify that objects in this column include a Z
  coordinate. Default is false.
* <tt>:has_m</tt> -- Specify that objects in this column include an M
  coordinate. Default is false.

To create a spatial index, set the <tt>:spatial</tt> option to true when
creating the index.

Examples:

  create_table :my_spatial_table do |t|
    t.column :shape, :geometry  # or t.geometry :shape
    t.line_string :path, :srid => 3785
    t.point :latlon, :geographic => true
  end
  change_table :my_spatial_table do |t|
    t.index :latlon, :spatial => true
  end

=== Spatial Attributes

When this adapter is in use, spatial attributes in your \ActiveRecord
objects will have RGeo geometry values. You can set spatial attributes
either to RGeo geometry objects, or to strings in WKT (well-known text)
format, which the adapter will automatically convert to geometry objects.

Spatial objects in RGeo are tied to a factory that specifies the
coordinate system as well as other behaviors of the object. You must
therefore specify a factory for each spatial column (attribute) in your
\ActiveRecord class. You can either set an explicit factory for a specific
column, or provide a factory generator that will yield the appropriate
factory for the table's spatial columns based on their types. For the
former, call the <tt>set_rgeo_factory_for_column</tt> class method on your
\ActiveRecord class. For the latter, set the rgeo_factory_generator class
attribute. This generator should understand the usual <tt>:srid</tt>,
<tt>:has_z_coordinate</tt>, and <tt>:has_m_coordinate</tt> options. It
will also be passed a <tt>:geographic</tt> option indicating whether the
column is a geography column. The set_rgeo_factory_for_column and 
rgeo_factory_generator methods are actually implemented and documented in
the "rgeo-activerecord" gem.

Examples, given the spatial table defined above:

  class MySpatialTable < ActiveRecord::Base
    
    # By default, use the GEOS implementation for spatial columns.
    self.rgeo_factory_generator = RGeo::Geos.factory_generator
    
    # But use a geographic implementation for the :latlon column.
    set_rgeo_factory_for_column(:latlon, RGeo::Geographic.spherical_factory)
    
  end

Now you can interact with the data using the RGeo types:

  rec = MySpatialTable.new
  rec.latlon = 'POINT(-122 47)'   # You can set by feature object or WKT.
  loc = rec.latlon                # Accessing always returns a feature object, in
                                  # this case, a geographic that understands latitude.
  loc.latitude                    # => 47
  rec.shape = loc                 # the factory for the :shape column is GEOS, so the
                                  # value will be cast from geographic to GEOS.
  RGeo::Geos.is_geos?(rec.shape)  # => true

=== Spatial Queries

You can create simple queries based on objective equality in the same way
you would on a scalar column:

  rec = MySpatialTable.where(:latlon => RGeo::Geos.factory.point(-122, 47)).first

You can also use WKT:

  rec = MySpatialTable.where(:latlon => 'POINT(-122 47)').first

Most more complex spatial queries require the use of SQL functions. You
can write such queries in raw SQL, but you may find the "squeel" gem
very helpful in this regard. Using squeel, you can write queries like
the following:

  my_polygon = get_my_polygon()
  MySpatialTable.where{st_intersects(latlon, my_polygon)}.first

One common query is to find all objects displaying in a window. This can
be done using the overlap (&&) operator with a bounding box, as follows:

  sw = get_sw_corner()
  ne = get_ne_corner()
  window = RGeo::Cartesian::BoundingBox.create_from_points(sw, ne)
  MySpatialTable.where{latlon.op('&&', window)}.all

Note that using squeel to create SQL functions requires Rails 3.1 or later.

== Installation And Configuration

=== Installing The Adapter Gem

This adapter has the following requirements:

* Ruby 1.8.7 or later. Ruby 1.9.2 or later preferred.
* PostgreSQL 9.0 or later.
* PostGIS 1.5 or later.
* pg gem 0.11 or later.
* \ActiveRecord 3.0.3 or later. Earlier versions will not work.
  Should be compatible with Rails versions through 3.2.x.
* rgeo gem 0.3.10 or later.
* rgeo-activerecord gem 0.4.4 or later.

Install this adapter as a gem:

  gem install activerecord-postgis-adapter

See the README for the "rgeo" gem, a required dependency, for further
installation information.

=== Basic Setup

To use this adapter, add this gem, "activerecord-postgis-adapter", to
your Gemfile, and then request the adapter name "postgis" in your
database connection configuration (which, for a Rails application, is in
the config/database.yml file). Most of the rest of the configuration
parameters are identical to those used by the stock "postgresql" adapter,
so you can create a new Rails application using:

  rails new my_app --database=postgresql

...and then just change the adapter name to "postgis".

Next, the PostGIS adapter includes a special railtie that provides
support for PostGIS databases in ActiveRecord's rake tasks. This railtie
is required in order to run, e.g., rake test. To install this railtie,
you should add this line to your config/application.rb:

  require 'active_record/connection_adapters/postgis_adapter/railtie'

Note that this railtie must load after the ActiveRecord railtie. That is,
the above require command should appear after <tt>require 'rails/all'</tt>.

Besides the adapter name "postgis", most of the other database connection
configuration parameters are the same as for the stock postgresql adapter.
However, there are several important differences:

The <i>postgis_extension</i> parameter is specific to the PostGIS adapter,
and directs the adapter to use PostgreSQL's CREATE EXTENSION mechanism to
install the PostGIS types, functions, and tables to a newly created
database. Generally, the value should be set to true, although you can
also set it to a comma-delimited list of extension names (which should
include the base "postgis" extension) if you want to customize which
extensions are installed. This is the easiest and cleanest way to create
a PostGIS-enabled database, but it requires PostgreSQL 9.1 or later and
PostGIS 2.0 or later.

The <i>script_dir</i> parameter is specific to the PostGIS adapter, and
provides an alternative mechanism for installing the PostGIS definitions
into a new database if either PostgreSQL 9.1 or PostGIS 2.0 is not
available. Its value should be set to the path to the directory containing
the SQL scripts for PostGIS installation. This is the directory containing
the files <tt>postgis.sql</tt> and <tt>spatial_ref_sys.sql</tt>. (A common
setting might be <tt>/usr/local/share/contrib/postgis-1.5</tt>.)

If you do not provide <i>postgis_extension</i> or <i>script_dir</i>, you
will need to add the PostGIS definitions to the database manually.
Generally, therefore, one of them is required at least for the test
database, which is usually automatically created by the rake tasks.

The <i>su_username</i> and <i>su_password</i> parameters are provided as
optional parameters. If present, they specify an auxiliary PostgreSQL role
that must have superuser privileges, and will be used for two functions:

* Creation of the database. This is so the main database user that you
  specify doesn't need superuser or createdb privileges.
* Installation of the PostGIS definitions, if requested by the presence
  of <i>script_dir</i>. This process normally requires a PostgreSQL role
  with superuser privileges, so again if you don't want your main database
  user to have superuser, you can perform this one-time procedure using
  this alternate user.

Any schemas listed in the <i>schema_search_path</i> parameter are
automatically created by <tt>rake db:create</tt>. This is arguably what
the stock PostgreSQL adapter should be doing anyway.

If the schema name "postgis" is included in the <i>schema_search_path</i>
parameter, the PostGIS adapter omits it from a SQL structure dump. This
can be useful to prevent PostGIS definitions from appearing in the dump
as described below.

=== Dealing With PostGIS Definitions

PostGIS adds many objects (types, functions, triggers, meta-information
tables, and other elements) to a PostgreSQL database. These objects are
required for PostGIS to do its magic, but they can be a hassle when you
are managing a database using Rails and \ActiveRecord. For example:

* Dumping the structure as sql (rake db:structure:dump) may include all
  the PostGIS definitions as well, cluttering your SQL dump.
* Rake tasks that automatically create the test database (e.g. rake test)
  may fail or emit a number of errors, because PostGIS definitions are
  either missing from or being added twice to the test database.

To deal with these issues, we recommend the following technique:

* Set either <i>postgis_extension</i> or <i>script_dir</i> in both your
  development and test database configurations. This will cause the
  PostGIS Adapter to automatically add the PostGIS definitions and
  spatial references to your databases when rake db:create is run.
* Include "postgis" in your <i>schema_search_path</i> for both your
  development and test databases. It is recommended that you include it
  as the <i>last</i> element, so that your application's tables don't get
  added to it by default. For example:
    schema_search_path: public,postgis
  The PostGIS Adapter responds to this special name by sandboxing the
  PostGIS definitions into it when rake db:create is run, and it omits
  this schema when running SQL structure dumps.
* Provide a separate <i>su_username</i> and <i>su_password</i> role for
  your database, and make sure that separate role has the SUPERUSER
  privilege. This will cause the PostGIS Adapter to log in as that role
  when creating the database, since the PostGIS definition installation
  requires SUPERUSER. Alternately, you can give the normal database role
  SUPERUSER privilege, which may be okay for a private development
  database. These are used only by <tt>rake db:create</tt> so you can
  remove them from your database.yml for your staging or production
  databases once you've performed the initial creation.

Finally, you generally should _not_ set the \ActiveRecord schema format
to <tt>:sql</tt>. You should leave it set to <tt>:ruby</tt>. The reason
is that SQL structure dumps do not currently properly emit the correct
<tt>AddGeometryColumn</tt> calls to create geometry columns. As a result,
the <tt>geometry_columns</tt> table will not be populated properly, among
other issues. Instead, the schema.rb output by the Ruby schema format
should properly replicate the schema. This is a known issue that we are
investigating.

Of course, the above steps are only really necessary if you are using the
\ActiveRecord rake tasks that create databases, either directly such as
<tt>rake db:create</tt>, or indirectly such as <tt>rake test</tt>. They
should not be necessary for running migrations or normal website execution.

== Additional Information

=== Known bugs and limitations

The PostGIS Adapter has not yet been tested in a large variety of
environments, and we are still fixing bugs. Here is a partial list of
current known issues.

* Dumping as SQL (i.e. rake db:structure:dump) does not properly emit
  <tt>AddGeometryColumn</tt> calls, and so does not completely create the
  spatial schema (e.g. it fails to add the proper row to the
  <tt>geometry_columns</tt> table.) Because of this, you should not depend
  on a SQL dump to be an accurate representation of the schema. (That is,
  you should not set <tt>config.active_record.schema_format</tt> to
  <tt>:sql</tt>.)
* Other rake tasks may not be supported. Unfortunately, Rails makes it
  difficult for custom \ActiveRecord adapters to support the standard
  rake tasks.

=== Development and support

Documentation is available at http://dazuma.github.com/activerecord-postgis-adapter/rdoc

Source code is hosted on Github at http://github.com/dazuma/activerecord-postgis-adapter

Contributions are welcome. Fork the project on Github.

Report bugs on Github issues at http://github.org/dazuma/activerecord-postgis-adapter/issues

Support available on the rgeo-users google group at http://groups.google.com/group/rgeo-users

Contact the author at dazuma at gmail dot com.

=== Acknowledgments

The PostGIS Adapter and its supporting libraries (including RGeo) are
written by Daniel Azuma (http://www.daniel-azuma.com).

Development is supported by Pirq. (http://www.pirq.com).

This adapter implementation owes some debt to the spatial_adapter plugin
(http://github.com/fragility/spatial_adapter). Although we made some
different design decisions for this adapter, studying the spatial_adapter
source gave us a head start on the implementation.

=== License

Copyright 2010-2012 Daniel Azuma

All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
* Neither the name of the copyright holder, nor the names of any other
  contributors to this software, may be used to endorse or promote products
  derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
